# Data Viz Extra Credit


The first data visualization I analyzed was the [Climate-Conflict-Vulnerability Index](https://climate-conflict.org/www/data-pages/hazards), a project commissioned by the German Federal Foreign Office and produced in collaboration with FutureLab at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and Center for Crisis Early Warning at the University of the Bundeswehr Munich. This project visualizes data across many dimensions pertaining to environmental and conflict risks for different places across the world. It is displayed as a world map with an overlay of small dots whose size denotes the degree of risk. Hovering over a dot shows the value associated. A menu allows you to select from several values, including subsets of climate risk, conflict risk, and vulnerability factors. Africa has a very high overall value over all of these dimensions, denoting a high degree of risk at the intersection of these factors. Economic inequality is widespread over the entire map. 

This data visualization is effective due to good mapping, signifiers, and feedback. The menu is laid out in a way that it’s clear what you’re selecting. Color signifies related topics. Mousing over the map creates feedback of the hover-display, and clicking on a menu item causes visual changes in the UI (black border around the selected item, updated key) along with displaying the corresponding data. Color plays a major role in signifying what data the user is viewing, and it also allows multiple data sets to be viewed at once with colors overlapping. I could imagine that users who are less familiar with online menu navigation may have a hard time using this visualization. For instance, they may not know that they can click on different menu items to access different data. In addition, you have to click on a plus or minus sign in the upper right  hand corner to zoom in or out, which is fine, but I initially tried to zoom in using my touchpad, which didn’t work and was frustrating. In addition, when zoomed in, you can left-click and drag to pan around the data set, but there is no instruction reflecting this feature. The data visualization relies somewhat on the user’s internet and electronic media literacy to be operable.

For my prototype, I wanted to make a visualization  where the data moves around the screen in a random way, but stops when you hover over it. I feel like I’ve seen this type of visualization before, but I couldn’t find an example. My prototype simply features the random motion which occurs on a timer every hundred frames. It was also good practice with object-oriented-programming and arrays of objects.
