# DOET Chapter 5 Pages 162-191
## Erorrs

This reading begins with the idea that we tend to over-attribute accidents to human error, rather than to design error. Norman says that many of our accidents could be avoided if we sought design solutions rather than guilty individuals, and that we should accept errors as part of the process of discovering improvements. He outlines some causes for errors, interruption being one; when a task is cut-off in the middle, it’s challenging to continue correctly. Multitasking is a related cause, preventing real focus on any individual task. Norman says that in these examples, humans are expected to behave unnaturally, like machines, but we simply don’t operate that way. He goes on to define two main categories of accidental errors; namely slips and mistakes. Slips are when you have the right goal in mind but perform the wrong action, and they can involve either simple action-errors or memory lapses. Mistakes are when you act based on an incorrect goal, and they can result from a lack of knowledge, a misapplication of rules, or again, memory lapses. Norman outlines how these types of errors fit into the 7 stages of action. Of note, memory lapses happen in-between different stages, while the other types are associated with particular stages of either evaluation or execution.

I found interesting the idea that mistakes happen because we are creative. Norman says that because extrapolation and prediction come so naturally to us, we are bound to get it wrong at least some of the time. In essence, it’s what makes us so effective as a species that also causes errors related to incorrect goals. I also took note of the idea that slips happen more frequently with individuals skilled at the particular task, because they will tend to be working on autopilot. This is a little counterintuitive but it makes perfect sense. If you’re very familiar with a task, you’re likely to perform it without much conscious awareness and thus the errors you make will be more to do with memory lapses or faulty actions, rather than misapplication of rules or lack of knowledge. I also found it interesting that Norman draws a distinction between accidental and deliberate violations, saying the latter are quite common due to time and social pressures. An example would be driving over the speed limit so you can get to work early. Norman decides not to address these, calling them “organizational and societal errors” (page 170 of Revised and Expanded Edition, 2013). I find these types of violations interesting, and I’d like to explore ways to address them.
