# Chapter 2 of DOET
## Psychology, Cognition, Design, and Consciousness

This chapter focuses on how we interact with the world around us, using psychological concepts to describe the feedback loop between us and our environment. It starts out by describing two “gulfs” that have to be crossed in every action: the first one is the gulf of execution, where we figure out what we want to do and do it; the second is the gulf of evaluation, where we assess what effect our action had and whether it accomplished our goal.  Don Norman breaks each of these gulfs into sub-sections (on the execution side: goal, plan, specify, perform; and on the evaluation side: perceive, interpret, compare), and groups each of these subsections into levels of processing (visceral, behavioral, reflective) based on what type of neurological structures are involved with each. The reflective level of processing is the one that involves the most conscious thought, and it is the one where we figure out whether we accomplished our goal and what to try next in order to do so.

Another concept Norman outlines is “root cause analysis”, or following a behavior to its primary goal, the one that drives all sub-goals. The related quote from the Harvard business professor, and Norman’s analysis, got me to laugh.

He walks us through a number of other important concepts as well. One is that poor design can cause major harm, as in the case of doors opening inward when people are trying to escape from a burning building. This is a reason for designers to be aware of how users will perceive our designs. 

I found his finger-wiggling experiment interesting. He asks the reader to wiggle different fingers and describe what they did differently to achieve this. The experiment is meant to illustrate the fact that certain levels of action don’t involve conscious thought; this is why we can’t describe clearly what we do in order to make our index finger, for example, wiggle.

He gives us a number of axioms for design psychology. One is that we should design for when things go wrong, not just for when they go right. There should be mechanisms in place to protect people from negative consequences of errors, which are bound to happen. He also says that we should avoid blaming the user, because error is human nature and in most cases a design solution could have prevented mistakes. 

This chapter appealed to my background in cognitive science, echoing many things that I learned, such as the perception-action feedback loop and different levels of processing in regard to behavior and thought. There were times when I wondered where he got some of the information for the claims he was making surrounding cognition.

An idea I had when I was reading this chapter was that the relationship between subconscious and conscious thought may be akin to that between neural-network programming and traditional coding. One is fast, generalized, good at making predictions and pattern-matching, and is a bit of a black-box. The other is logical, step-by-step, clear, and slower. It makes me wonder what ways there are to combine the two types of programming architectures, and whether that would give us the type of performance we are looking for with our technologies.
